Min API Quick Ref: Add validation support .NET 10 Prev4 (#35501)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/fundamentals/minimal-apis.md

[!INCLUDE [](~/fundamentals/minimal-apis/includes/parameter-binding10.md)]

## Validation support in Minimal APIs

Support for validation in Minimal APIs is now available. This feature allows you to request validation of data sent to your API endpoints. Enabling validation allows the ASP.NET Core runtime to perform any validations defined on the:

* Query
* Header
* Request body

> Validations are defined using attributes in the [`DataAnnotations`](xref:System.ComponentModel.DataAnnotations) namespace. Developers customize the behavior of the validation system by:

Reviewer: I think you  can consolidate the doc for class and record types here.
```suggestion
Validations are defined using attributes in the [`DataAnnotations`](xref:System.ComponentModel.DataAnnotations) namespace. 

When a parameter to a Minimal API endpoint is a class or record type, validation attributes are automatically applied. For example:

```csharp
public record Product(
    [Required] string Name,
    [Range(1, 1000)] int Quantity);
```

The properties of the product for the following endpoint are validated using the attributes above before the endpoint logic is invoked.

```csharp
app.MapPost("/products", (Product product) =>
{
    // Endpoint logic here
    return TypedResults.Ok(product);
});
```

Developers customize the behavior of the validation system by:
```

* Implementing the [`IValidatableObject`](xref:System.ComponentModel.DataAnnotations.IValidatableObject) interface for complex validation logic.

If validation fails, the runtime returns a 400 Bad Request response with details of the validation errors.

### Enable built-in validation support for minimal APIs

Enable the built-in validation support for minimal APIs by calling the `AddValidation` extension method to register the required services in the service container for your application:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddValidation();
```

The implementation automatically discovers types that are defined in minimal API handlers or as base types of types defined in minimal API handlers. An endpoint filter performs validation on these types and is added for each endpoint.

Validation can be disabled for specific endpoints by using the `DisableValidation` extension method, as in the following example:

```csharp
app.MapPost("/products",
    ([EvenNumber(ErrorMessage = "Product ID must be even")] int productId, [Required] string name)
        => TypedResults.Ok(productId))
    .DisableValidation();
```

> ### Validation with record types
> <!-- https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pull/61193 -->
> <!-- https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pull/61402 -->
> 
> Minimal APIs also support validation with C# record types. Record types can be validated using attributes from the <xref:System.ComponentModel.DataAnnotations?displayProperty=fullName> namespace, similar to classes. For example:
> 
> ```csharp
> public record Product(
>     [Required] string Name,
>     [Range(1, 1000)] int Quantity);
> ```
> 
> When using record types as parameters in Minimal API endpoints, validation attributes are automatically applied in the same way as class types:
> 
> ```csharp
> app.MapPost("/products", (Product product) =>
> {
>     // Endpoint logic here
>     return TypedResults.Ok(product);
> });
> ```
> 

Reviewer: Then you can delete all this.
```suggestion
```
